---
published: false
layout: post
title: "Time Tracking for Founders"
date: 2012-11-05 13:21
comments: true
categories: 
---

How many hours have you worked on your Minimum Viable Product (MVP) in
the past sixth months? How many hours have you worked on your
lifestyle business this week? How long does it take you to write a
report? I’m able to give reasonable answers to these questions because
I track where I’m spending my time. Hackers turned founders are good
at web analytics; tracking visitors, funnel, etc. But I’m always
amazed how poor many founders are at tracking where they spend their
time.

<!-- more -->

Of course it’s easy to fool yourself thinking that working more hours
means accomplishing more. Working 10 hours a week on something doesn’t
necessarily means accomplishing double of working 5 hours a week. But
I believe that time spend it’s a valuable metric and, all things
equal, working on something for n hours a week will, most of the time,
put you farther ahead than not working at all. I track what I call
"focused time". If I stop to read my email, I'll stop the timer. If
I'm working and someone or something interrupts me, I'll stop (or
pause) the timer.

The usual disclaimers apply here; these are the things that work for
me, you need to apply the ones that work you you.

## The Basic Questions

I like to be able to answer the following questions:

1. How many hours did it take me to finish project X?
2. How many hours to finish task T?
3. For how long have I been working on task T today?
4. How many hours have I worked on my startup this week?

## Advantages

To me, the main advantage of tracking your time is focus. I trained
myself when I start the timer I work on the task at hand and nothing
else. Not only that, but it makes me think for a second what I'm
trying to accomplish. Instead of just thinking "I'm going to work on
my app", I'll be more specific, like "I'm going to close bug #23". I
like to use a timer that sits on the menubar (see screenshot below).

To be honest, this alone would be a compeling enough reason to track
my time. Even if I didn't save the data I'd still do it just to help
me keep focused. But since we do have the data, there are other
advantages.

I can use past data to help me making decisions. For instance, if a
project is taking longer than it should, I can decide to kill it. I do
this often with scripts that I think I can finish in half hour but end
up taking hours instead. The flipside is that I'm becoming much better
at predicting how long something is going to take.

Sort my priorities and say no when necessary. For instance, I know
that it takes me around 15 hours to write a basic project proposal. So
when someone asks me to write something I can say “I wish I could, but
this is going to take about 15 to 20 hours and I need to work on
project X instead”.

I'm not big on motivation (I think it's important, but it's hard to
stay "motivated" all the time), but it's motivational to see how many
hours you have been putting on your projects.

## What I Need

There are many different type of programs to log time. Some
concentrate on tracking the time of tasks, other on tracking billable
hours and generating fancy billing reports.

Before I switched to the Mac, I used a very nice Gnome applet called
[Hamster]. Unfortunately I haven’t been able to find anything similar
for the Mac. I tried I few, used Toggl for a while but now it seems
that I’ll have to write my own.

### On the menubar
To me, the most important feature is to show the task name and
stopwatch on the menubar. I like to be able to glance at the menubar
and see what I’m supposed to be working and for how long I’ve been
working. In the example below (using Hamster) you can see that I’m
working on a task called “make examples” and I’ve been working on it
for 27 minutes. You can configure Hamster to nag you from time to time
with the task name (the black thing in the screenshot). Some will find
this anoying, but it helps me to keep focused. You can, of course,
disable it.

![](../images/2012/11/05/hamster-pokeme.png)

### Pause and Stop

I like to be able to pause and stop the timer. This is simple but a
few applications don’t implement this functionality. Extra points to
have a global hotkey for these actions.

### Input and edit past events

I like to be able to to things like renaming, changing the duration,
and deleting an entry. It’s also useful to be able to input old
entries, specially for tasks you’ve performed outside the computer.
(Believe or not, some apps don't have this feature).

### Work Offline

There are a good number of online apps to track time (I have even used
one for a few months). The obvious advantage is that you can access
them in different computers and operating systems. But since I work
mainly from one computer, I prefer to use a program that works
offline.

### Simple

I don’t need any complicated features, just Projects (such as “Write
post ‘Time tracking for founders’), Tasks (such as “Write first
draft”), and Categories (such as “Blog”).

### Quick Statistics

One thing that I like about Hamster is that it shows some basic
information on the main screen without the need to go to the separate
reports window. In the following image we can see the total time for a
category (Blog: 0.7h), the time for the current task (27 min), and the
project name ("Time tracking for founders").

![](../images/2012/11/05/hamster-full.png)

## Manual vs. Automatic Time Tracking

I think that automatic tracking programs such as [RescueTime] are
great, but they don't help me to answer the questions I want. One
major problem is one app may have multiple uses. For example, watching
video on Youtube can be a productive task (lectures, for instance)
that is part of a project on just a plain distraction. However,
RescueTime will mark both as distractions.

Also, automatic time tracking tools re passive (duh! That's their main
point) and I like to see in real time how long things are taking. As I
mentioned, it help me to focus.

## Analysis

With more than one year worth of data, I was able to analyze XXXXXX

In the following image we can see the amout of time I worked in
different categories (startup is green, day job is red) over 6 months.
In the beginning I was trying to work in too many different things at
once, therefore not focusing on my startup. Also, we can see I used my
vacation time to do some serious startup work.

![](../images/2012/11/05/tasks-no-label.png)

Analyzing the data I was able to find what was my most productive
days. By productive I mean the day I worked more hours on my startup
over a period of time. Surprisingly, it was Monday and Thursday. I
tought Wednesday was going to me one of the most productive since I
usually don't teach on this day:

    Mon: 51.05h
    Thu: 40.34h
    Sun: 36.69h
    Tue: 36.10h
    Fri: 23.30h
    Wed: 19.65h
    Sat: 17.59h

Also, after analyzing this data, I gave up tring to be productive on
Saturdays. Now it's my day off.

But to me the biggest payoff is when I analyze the time I've spent in
individual projects. For instance, I realized I spent a huge amount of
time fiddling with tools when I was writing [my book] (I tend to do
that). The next time I write a book I'll be careful not to do that as
much.

Of course time is only one metric. Energy level is as import as time,
as if you have time and no energy you are not going to accomplish
much. On the other hand, given enough time and energy you can do
anything you want. Unfortunatelly, tracking energy levels is very
difficult and invasive. Out of curiosity, I recorded my perceived
energy level during the day for almost two weeks. Every half-hour I'd
rate my energy level as:

- 0: sleeping
- 1: need a nap
- 2: low energy
- 3: very good
- 4: very energetic

Originally I was going to show the following graphic that has the
average levels for earch week:

![](../images/2012/11/05/energy-by-hour.png)

But once I reviewed the data, I realized the graphic with average is
useless. Look how wild my energy levels were during the two weeks:

![](../images/2012/11/05/energy-level.png)

I collected this data one year ago and, frankly, I don't know what to
make of it today. I'm still curious about energy levels, though. Maybe
I'll do this experiment again.

## What I Use Now

The setup I have now is far from perfect but it's working for me. To
collect the time I use [StopWatchMenu], a simple app I developed
myself:

![](../images/2012/11/05/stop-watch-menu.png)

At the end of the day I enter the data in a simple Django app I run
locally. I use this app to generate reports and analyze the data I
have:

![](../images/2012/11/05/tracktime.png)

I could implement the stopwatch in the Django app, but I really like
to have the stopwatch in the menu, as I mentioned previously. I'm
working on a time tracking for the Mac that I'll combine the two apps.
Stay tuned ;-)

## Conclusion

time is not the only metric
energy is important but difficult to track
it's silly to compare my time to your time
still worthwhile

<!-- Links -->

[Hamster]: http://projecthamster.wordpress.comparisson
[Jim Collins]: http://www.nytimes.com/2009/05/24/business/24collins.html
[Rescuetime]: http://www.rescuetime.com
[my book]: http://musicforgeeksandnerds.com
[StopWatchMenu]: https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/stopwatchmenu/id536473057?mt=12
